1 Ukraine-Russia War (URW) Taxonomy

1. Blaming the war on others rather than the invader Definition: Statements attributing responsibility or fault to entities other than Russia in the context of Russia's invasion of Ukraine.
Instructions to Annotators: Look for direct or implied statements that
shift blame away from Russia.

Consider who is being held responsible for
negative events or situations.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Ukraine is the aggressor

Definition: Statements that shift the responsibility of the aggression
to Ukraine instead of Russia and portray Ukraine as the attacker.

(b) The West are the aggressors

Definition: Statements that shift the responsibility for the conflict
and escalation to the Western block.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for direct or implied state-
ments that mention that this conflict was a direct consequence of
actions taken by the West.

Consider who is being held responsible
for negative events or situations.

2. Discrediting Ukraine
Definition: Statements that undermine the legitimacy, actions, or inten-
tions of Ukraine or Ukrainians as a nation.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for direct or implied statements that
attack some aspect of the Ukrainian society

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Rewriting Ukraine's history

Definition: Statements that aim to reestablish history of Ukrainian
nation in a way that discredits its reputation.

(b) Discrediting Ukrainian nation and society

Definition: Statements that aggressively undermine the legitimacy
and reputability of Ukrainian ethnicity and people

Instructions to Annotators: Use this only is case that the subject
of the attack is the people of Ukraine, or in case of generalizations.

(c) Discrediting Ukrainian military

Definition: Statements that aim to undermine the capabilities, pro-
fessionalism or effectiveness of the Ukrainian armed forces.

(d) Discrediting Ukrainian government and officials and policies
Definition: Statements that seek to delegitimize the Ukrainian gov-
ernment, its leaders, and its policies, portraying them as corrupt or
incompetent.

Instructions to Annotators: Use this only is case that the subject
of the attack is the leaders of Ukraine or some of their specific policy
decisions.

(e) Ukraine is a puppet of the West

Definition: Claims that Ukraine is controlled or heavily influenced by
Western powers, particularly the United States and European Union.

(f) Ukraine is a hub for criminal activities

Definition: Allegations that Ukraine is a center for illegal activities
such as human trafficking, drug smuggling, or organized crime

(g) Ukraine is associated with nazism

Definition: Accusations that Ukrainian society or government has
ties to or sympathies with Nazi ideology, often referencing historical
events or extremist groups.

Instructions to Annotators: This can go with discrediting Ukrainian
nation, but should be used with any mention or hint of sympathy or
association with (neo-) Nazism, historical or not.

(h) Situation in Ukraine is hopeless

Definition: Statements that portray Ukraine as having no viable
perspectives or no potential positive future.

3. Russia is the Victim
Definition: Statements that portray Russia as being unfairly targeted or
victimized.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for narratives that depict Russia as
suffering unjust consequences. Focus on language that evokes sympathy
for Russia's position.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) The West is russophobic

Definition: Statements that claim that the negative reaction to Rus-
sia's actions are because of the negative perspective of western coun-
tries instead of Russia's own actions.

(b) Russia actions in Ukraine are only self-defence
Definition: Statements that justify Russia's action solely as legiti-
mate self-defence and not a deliberate action.

(c) UA is anti-RU extremists

Definition: Statements claiming that Ukraine is comprised of ex-
tremist elements that are vehemently opposed to Russia.

4. Praise of Russia
Definition: Statements that positively highlight Russia's actions, policies,
or character

Instructions to Annotators: Identify expressions of admiration, sup-
port, or positive evaluation of Russia. Consider both explicit praise and
subtle commendation.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Praise of Russian military might

Definition: Statements that positively highlight Russia's military in-
stitutions, equipment and scale.

(b) Praise of Russian President Vladimir Putin

Definition: Statements that present Vladimir Putin positively, in-
cluding his personal and leadership qualities.

(c) Russia is a guarantor of peace and prosperity

Definition: Statements that portray Russia solely in a positive man-
ner, emphasising their potential to provide peace and prosperity to
those that cooperate.

(d) Russia has international support from a number of countries
and people

Definition: Statements that emphasise the popularity and acceptance
of Russia in the international stage.

(e) Russian invasion has strong national support
Definition: Statements that emphasise the popularity and acceptance
of the invasion inside Russia and on Russian-speaking populations.

Instructions to Annotators: Use this only when there is men-
tion to the Russian population or the segment of the population in
Ukraine that supports Russia.

5. Overpraising the West
Definition: Statements that excessively and unduly laud or extol the
virtues, accomplishments, and moral superiority of Western countries, par-
ticularly in the context of international relations and military.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) NATO will destroy Russia

Definition: Statements that suggest or claim that the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) and its allies are capable or already in
the process of eradicating Russia.

(b) The West belongs in the right side of history

Definition: Statements that portray Western nations and their ac-
tions as morally superior and aligned with progress and justice and
possess moral superiority.

(c) The West has the strongest international support

Definition: Statements that emphasize or claim widespread backing
for Western policies and actions from the international community. 
potentially downplaying opposition or criticism.

6. Speculating war outcomes
Definition: Statements that predict or make assumptions about the po-
tential results or consequences of a conflict

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Russian army is collapsing

Definition: Statements that suggest or claim that the Russian mili-
tary is experiencing a significant decline in its effectiveness, strength,
or morale.

(b) Russian army will lose all the occupied territories

Definition: Speculative statements that predict or assume the poten-
tial outcomes of the conflict, specifically regarding the possibility of
the Russian military losing control of all the territories it currently
occupies.

(c) Ukrainian army is collapsing

Definition: Statements that suggest or claim that the Ukrainian mil-
itary is experiencing a significant decline in its effectiveness, strength,
or morale.

7. Discrediting the West, Diplomacy
Definition: Statements that criticize the Western countries, or interna-
tional diplomatic efforts.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for criticism or negative portrayals
of Western governments, leaders, or policies. Pay attention to language
that suggests incompetence, hypocrisy, or malice.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) The EU is divided

Definition: Statements that present the EU as a set of divided entities
and interests, usually unable to take actions.

(b) The West is weak

Definition: Statements presenting the West overall as a non-potent
group of countries (that is not as powerful as it used to be).

(c) The West is overreacting

Definition: Statements that claim that the West and its institutions
are reacting to Russia's actions in a disproportionate manner.

(d) The West does not care about Ukraine, only about its in-
terests

Definition: Statements that claim that the West is only interested in
Ukraine for its own benefits, disregarding the country's fate.

(e) Diplomacy does/will not work
Definition: Statements discrediting the potential of ongoing or po-
tential diplomatic efforts.

(f) West is tired of Ukraine

Definition: Claims that Western countries, particularly the United
States and European nations, are becoming fatigued or disinterested
in supporting Ukraine and its efforts.

8. Negative Consequences for the West
Definition: Statements that highlight or predict adverse outcomes for
Western countries and their interests.

Instructions to Annotators: Identify predictions or reports of nega-
tive impacts on Western nations. Consider both current and future con-
sequences mentioned.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Sanctions imposed by Western countries will backfire
Definition: Statements that catastrophize on the possible negative
effects for Western sanctions of Russia.

(b) The conflict will increase the Ukrainian refugee flows to Eu-
rope

Definition: Statements that catastrophize on the possible refugee
outflows due to the conflict.

9. Distrust towards Media
Definition: Statements that question the reliability or integrity of media
organizations.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for language that undermines con-
fidence in media sources. Pay attention to claims of bias, misinformation,
or manipulation.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) Western media is an instrument of propaganda

Definition: Statements that discredit the media institutions of the
West and claim that they are instruments of propaganda.

(b) Ukrainian media cannot be trusted

Definition: Statements that discredit the media institutions of the
Ukraine and claim that they should not be trusted for reporting on
the war.

10. Amplifying war-related fears
Definition: Statements that evoke fear or anxiety about potential threats,
dangers or reactions.

Instructions to Annotators: Identify language designed to elicit fear
or concern about severe consequences.

Consider both direct and implied
threats mentioned.

Sub-Narratives:

(a) By continuing the war we risk WWIII

Definition: Statements that warn against upsetting Russia's and its
leadership, evoking fear of causing WW3.

(b) Russia will also attack other countries
Definition: Statements that claim that it is imminent that Russia
will attack other countries.

(c) There is a real possibility that nuclear weapons will be em-
ployed

Definition: Statements that evoke fear or anxiety about the use of
nuclear weapons.

Instructions to Annotators: This narrative can potentially go in
two directions, either claiming that West should not anger Russia, or
that Russia should be stopped before they use them.

(d) NATO should/will directly intervene

Definition: Statements that suggest or claim that the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) ought to or will take direct military
action in a conflict, potentially implying a shift in policy or strategy.

11. Hidden plots by secret schemes of powerful groups
Definition: Statements that suggest hidden plots or secretive actions by
powerful groups related to the war.

Instructions to Annotators: Look for narratives involving clandestine
activities, secret agendas, or unproven allegations.

Focus on claims that
lack credible evidence and suggest hidden motives.

